---
title: 'Pipengine: an ultra simple YAML-based pipeline execution engine'
tags:
  - pipeline
  - workflows
  - reproducibility
authors:
 - name: Francesco Strozzi
   orcid: 0000-0002-6845-6982
   affiliation: 1
 - name: Raoul Jean Pierre Bonnal
   orcid: 0000-0002-2123-6536
   affiliation: 2
affiliations:
 - name: Enterome Bioscience, Paris - France
   index: 1
 - name: INGM - Isitituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi": Milan, Italy
   index: 2
date: 25 July 2017
---

# Summary

This is an ultra simple YAML-based pipeline execution engine. The tool allows defining a pipeline template in YAML, specifing command lines, resources and software to be used along with pipeline steps dependencies. Pipengine is a sample-centric tool, so the pipeline can then be applied over a single sample or multiple samples data, generating actual runnable bash scripts which can then be sumitted automatically to a scheduling system or runned locally. 

The bash scripts generated by Pipengine includes error controls and logging for each step, plus the automatical generation of directories based on sample and pipeline steps names, and the moving of input and output data across original and temporary folders if needed. This allows the user to avoid rewriting boiler plate code to perform all these necessary accessory tasks. 

Moreover Pipengine produces a stable and reproducible working and output tree for each analysis, which transparently stores all the results of each step of a pipeline for each sample analysed. In this way pipelines' intermediate or final results can be predictably accessed by the analysts and/or easily parsed with other tools. 

The software was developed in 2012, so a pre-CWL/WDL era, and has been used across several research groups and core facilities since it's first appearance. Pipengine directly supports the PBS/Torque scheduler for submission of jobs, but given that the support for a scheduler is based on specific options written automatically inside the bash scripts generated by the tool, it can be easily adapted to work with other schedulers if needed. 

Pipengine is written in Ruby and is available for download as a BioRuby gem.
